
So in this example, we want to hit
an apple that's hanging from a tree with a projectile.
And the main point of the problem
is to figure out at what angle to the ground
should we aim our projectile when we fire it off
in order to hit the apple.
And in this example, we're assuming
that the apple drops from the tree at the same instant
that we fire the projectile.
So in this drawing, let's just put some dimensions in here.
We'll assume that the apple starts out
at a height h above the ground, that the horizontal distance
from where the projectile starts to the apple
is a distance d, that the projectile starts at a distance
s above the ground, and that we fire the projectile off
with an initial velocity v0 at an angle theta
0 with respect to the horizontal.
And let's define our origin to be
right here on the ground directly
below where the projectile begins.
We need to define our coordinate system.
So the i hat direction will be horizontally to the right,
and the j hat direction will be vertically upwards
with an origin at this point.
So the question that we have is, what should our angle theta 0
be in order to hit the apple, which
starts falling from the tree at the same instant
that we fire our projectile, and we
want to hit the apple before it hits the ground?
OK, so to work this out, we need to consider
the kinematics of two separate objects, our projectile
and the apple.
So let's begin with the apple.
So for our apple, the apple drops vertically straight
downward.
So its horizontal position throughout its motion
is just unchanged.
So the x-coordinate of the apple as a function of time
is just d, it's just a constant.
Its y-coordinate, it starts out at a height h,
and then it drops due to the acceleration of gravity.
And so that's given by minus 1/2 gt squared.
It's a minus because it's falling in the minus j hat
direction.
Now, for our projectile-- let's call
it a bullet-- for our bullet, the x-coordinate of the bullet,
it starts out at the origin, at x equals 0.
And its initial motion, it has an initial velocity v0
in this direction.
The horizontal component of that is v0
times the cosine of theta 0l.
And so its displacement at time t
is v0 t times the cosine of theta 0.
And there's no horizontal acceleration,
so that completes our x-coordinate
as a function of time.
For our y-coordinate, we start out
at a height s above the ground.
There is the change in the y-coordinate
due to the initial velocity, which has component v0
sine theta 0.
So that's plus v0 t sine theta 0.
And there's also a vertical acceleration
due to gravity, which gives us minus 1/2 gt squared.
So that's the kinematics of the apple and the bullet.
Now, for there to be a hit at time t equals capital T,
the coordinates of the apple and the bullet
have to be the same at that collision time.
So for a hit at t equals big T, we
require that the x-coordinate of the bullet at time big T
is the same as the x-coordinate of the apple,
and likewise that the y-coordinate of the bullet
is equal to the y-coordinate of the apple.
OK, so let's look at each of these in turn.
For our x-coordinate, the x-coordinate of the bullet
is v0 capital T times the cosine of theta 0,
and that has to be equal to the x-coordinate
of the apple, which is just d.
So notice that I can solve this for the time of the collision,
capital T. And that's just d minus v0 times
the cosine of theta 0.
Now, for our y-coordinate, the y-coordinate of the bullet
is s plus v0 capital T times the sine of theta not minus 1/2 gt
squared.
And that's equal to the y-coordinate
of the apple, which is h minus 1/2 gt squared.

All right.
Now, I can rearrange that.
Notice that I have a minus 1/2 gt squared on both sides,
so those cancel out.
I can rearrange that to write v0 times capital T
times the sine of theta 0 is equal to h minus s.
So that the sine of theta 0 is equal to h
minus s over v0 capital T.
But remember, we solved for capital T here.
So I can substitute that in.

So that gives me h minus s over v0 times 1 over t,
which is v0 cosine theta 0 over d.
And so I can rewrite that as h minus s over d
times the cosine of theta 0.

So rewriting that, I have on the left hand side
sine of theta 0 over cosine of theta 0
is equal to h minus s over d.
And notice on the left hand side sine over cosine
is just tangent, so this is just the tangent of theta 0.
Now, think about what that means.
If I draw a right triangle where this is theta 0
and this is h minus s and this is
d, and so this is the same geometry
we have here if we drew the triangle like this.
So theta 0 is just the angle to the location of the apple
just before it drops.
So what this calculation tells us
is that the correct thing to do if we want to hit the apple,
if we know the apple's going to drop at the same instant
that we fire, then we should aim at the location
that the apple is at that instant.
We shouldn't try and lead the apple and fire below it
or fire above it.
We should aim directly at the apple.
And what the kinematics tells us is
that both the bullet and the apple
fall vertically down at the same rate.
And so that will give us a collision.
Now, it's worth thinking about two different cases,
which I'm not going to solve for you here.
The first is, what if the apple didn't drop?
Suppose the apple just stayed in the tree, and I fired?
If I aimed directly at the apple and the apple didn't drop,
then I would miss the apple because the bullet would
drop as it went across this distance d.
Now, of course, if the apple were big enough,
or if the bullet were flying fast enough, if v0
was fast enough, then it might be
that the amount that the bullet dropped
wouldn't be bigger than the thickness of the apple.
So I might still graze the apple.
But I wouldn't hit the apple dead center.
So if I knew that the apple wasn't going to drop,
and I wanted to hit it dead center,
I would have to choose some different angle, theta 0l.
And we can sort of see intuitively
that that angle would have to be a little bit steeper so
that the bullet would drop and then hit the apple.
And so the way we would solve that is
in our original kinematics equations,
for the motion of the apple, x would still
be a constant d, but if the apple wasn't dropping, then
y of the apple would also be a constant.
We wouldn't have the second term.
We would just have y equals h.
And then I would have to solve for a collision.
The other case to think about that I'd
like you to think about is, what if the apple
begins dropping for a short interval before we fired?
So that at the time that we fire our projectile,
the apple is already dropping.
Well, that's equivalent to saying that at time equals
0 when I fire, that the apple has some initial velocity,
whatever velocity it's picked up by dropping
in whatever interval it was dropping before.
So now my kinematics for my apple
in the vertical direction, I would
have an additional term here, a minus v0 t,
where v0 is that initial velocity.

And that's a different v0.
I should have used a different symbol.
It's a different v0 than the v0 of the bullet.
But there would be an initial velocity, falling velocity,
of the apple that I'd have to consider.
So the particular details of what's happening with the apple
change the kinematics.
And it's worth thinking about how
that would change your answer.