
Let's talk about gravity.
The universal law of gravitation governs
everything in the universe.
No matter how far or close two objects are,
they are always mutually attracting each other.
And that is described by that universal law.
It was Newton who first discovered it.
We're now going to check out how this works.
So let's consider the sun here.

And we have also another object.
Let's say it's Earth.

And we'll give this the mass m1 and this one m2.
And so they will be attracting each other.
And that force will be called f 1,2.
So the force on object 2 due to the interaction
between objects 1 and 2.
And the same is happening for this object.
So we have a force on one due to the interaction with objects 1
and 2.
There also a distance, r 1,2 apart.
Well, we also need an origin to further describe
the position of these objects.
So we're going to take, let's say,
this point here as our origin, which
means the sun here is a distance r1 away from the origin
and Earth is going to be a distance r2 away,
which also means that we can describe this distance here
in this way.
And actually that one--
and so this is going to be r 1,2 r 1,2 equals r2 minus r1.

And the magnitude would be r1, which is actually just this.
So there's one more thing that we need,
and that is a coordinate system.
That means we need to choose unit vectors.
And so far, we've been using Cartesian coordinates
with the i-hat and the j-hat unit factors.
Here, we're going to choose polar coordinates,
because that lends itself better to a system.
That's pretty easy to understand,
because if this is the sun here, and the Earth goes around it
in a circle, gravity will point radially inward.
And we're going to choose our unit vector
in this direction here going radially outward, which also
means this one is actually moving,
because if the Earth is here, r-hat will be pointing here.
And then if the Earth is here half a year later,
r-hat is going to be there.
And here, it's going to point down.
r-hat actually goes together with two more unit vectors,
the theta hat and the k hat unit vectors.
And you'll learn about that in subsequent lectures.
But for now, we're just going to use the r-hat direction here.
And what you can remember for now or what we will use for now
is that it just points radially outward.
That's all we need here.
So let's apply that to our system here.
So we have r-hat 1,2 here, and we have r-hat 2,1 over there.
So now, we're going to use this diagram
to understand the universal law of gravitation.
And for that, we are going to first start
by looking at the force that's acting here on our object 2.
So we have f 1,2.
And we know that this is proportional to both masses, m1
and m2.
And it's proportional to the distance between the two
objects squared, r 1,2 squared.
Now, this is a proportionality law.
And so that means we have to use--
we are missing a proportionality constant.
And that's our capital G here, the gravitational constant.
And what's missing from this right now is in what direction
is this force pointing?
And we can see here that f 2,1 is pointing up in this way.
But we have to describe it with this unit vector here.
And that points in the opposite direction.
So first, we're going to write down r 1,2 hat here.
And then we're going to get a minus sign over there,
because it goes in the opposite direction.
In the same way, we can write down
the force for the other object, f 2,1
And again, we have G, m1, m2 over r 1,2 squared.
Now this force we have to express in this unit vector.
So we get r 2,1 hat here.
And again, it points in the opposite direction
than the force.
So we're getting a minus sign here.
From that, and of course also, just visually from the diagram,
we will see that r-hat 1,2 equals minus r 2,1 hat.
And I should mention here that, of course,
the unit vectors, same as for all other unit vectors,
is just the vector itself divided by its magnitude.
So this is a normalization.
And what follows from that is that we have f 1,2
equals minus f 2,1.
And that is Newton's third law.
We have an equal and opposite reaction.
But the forces themselves have the same magnitude.
They just go in opposite directions,
just as you can see right here.
