
Today we'll discuss polar coordinate systems.
And we'll start from Cartesian coordinate system
and look at the correspondence of a position vector
in polar coordinate system.
So for point p, the position of this point p
in a Cartesian coordinate system is
uniquely defined by a vector.
So we draw our Cartesian coordinate system
starting with an origin o and a unit vector, i hat and j hat.
And we uniquely define the position vector
as this vector r that tells us where this particle
p is in our coordinate system.
This vector r is then defined as its component
in the i hat direction, which we'll call x.
So it will be x in the i hat direction.
And its component in the j hat direction, which we'll call y.
So it'll be plus y in the j hat direction.

The magnitude of this position vector
is now just going to be the hypotenuse of this right angle
triangle, which side of magnitude
x here and magnitude y here.
So the magnitude of this vector is going to be,
then, the square root of this side square, that's
x square, plus this side square, which is y square.

Now in the polar coordinate system,
we define a new unit vector, r hat,
which is pointing in the direction of the position
vector r.
Then the second unit vector, theta hat
will then be perpendicular to this r hat direction.
So let's rewrite the position of the point here.
And the point will be p.

In this polar coordinate system, now the vector,
the position vector r would have a certain magnitude
r in the r hat direction.
But there should be correspondence
between the Cartesian coordinate system
and the polar coordinate system.
That is that this magnitude is still the same,
regardless of which unit vectors I choose to represent them in.
So this magnitude of r is exactly the square root
of x squared plus y squared.

So for consistency, let's just take the magnitude
of the vector in polar coordinate system.
So we say that this has a magnitude which is r,
and it's in the r hat direction.
So we take the magnitude of r hat direction.
But since r hat is a unit vector, the magnitude of r hat
is just one.
So this is just going to be r times one, which is r.
So in fact, if we write down the magnitude of this vector
is r in polar coordinate system and it's exactly
square root of x square plus y square
in Cartesian coordinate system.
So this is one correspondence between polar coordinate system
and Cartesian coordinate system.

To further look at the correspondence
between Cartesian and polar coordinate system,
let's consider this angle that the position vector r makes
with respect to the x-axis.
And let's define this angle as theta.
Then by looking at the same right angle triangle,
we will know that x is the adjacent.
Therefore, x can be written as the magnitude
of r times cosine of theta.
And y is the opposite.
So y is going to be the magnitude of the position
vector r times sine of theta.
Since we know that the magnitude can
be written as just a r as a quantity,
so we're just going to simplify this expression
and say it's r cosine theta, and here, r times sine of theta.

All these expressions now are self-consistent.
If I take x square plus y square,
I get now r-squared cosine squared
theta plus r square sine squared theta.
I can factorize r square and get cosine square theta
plus sine square theta.
And this expression is 1.
Therefore, x square plus y square in fact
gives you, again, r square, which
is consistent with the expression
that we had just derived there.

The next correspondence that we need to derive between polar
and Cartesian coordinate system is
the correspondence between the unit
vectors i hat j hat and r hat theta hat.
For that list, redraw the vectors i hat and j hat.

A vector is fully defined by its magnitude and its direction.
So I can redraw r hat and theta hat
to have the same origin as i hat and j hat.
But notice that r hat is exactly in the direction
of the full position vector r, which is making an angle
theta with the x-axis.
Therefore, r hat is making an angle theta
with the x-axis, which is the i hat direction.
So I can draw my unit vector r hat
as making an angle theta with the i hat direction.
So it's easier to see, then, that the perpendicular
component which is theta hat will be pointing this way,
and it will be perpendicular to r hat.

It's also helpful to know that if this is an angle theta,
this is 90 degrees.
Therefore this, by correspondence,
you can solve that this angle is also theta.
So let's decompose now r hat and theta hat
as a function of i hat j hat using this picture.

So we can write down r hat.
Notice r hat is a unit vector.
So if I now look at the projection on the i hat and j
hat, if this is a unit vector, so it has a magnitude 1,
the component on the i hat direction
is just going to be the adjacent, which
is cosine of theta.
So cosine of theta times magnitude 1
in the i hat direction.
And then r hat is also going to have
a component in the positive j hat direction, which
is going to be the opposite.
So it's going to be sine of theta in the j hat direction.

Now let's look at the theta hat vector.
Notice that theta hat actually projects
and has a component opposite of the i hat direction.
So i hat is pointing this way.
theta hat actually has a component in this direction,
so opposite of i hat direction.
So it's going to have a component in the minus i hat
direction.

And the magnitude of that component
is better seen by looking at this right angle triangle,
where this is the angle theta.
So the magnitude now is going to be the opposite side, which
is a sine of theta times the magnitude of theta hat.
So theta hat is a unit vector.
So it's a 1 times sine of theta, and this component
is in the minus i hat direction.
theta hat also has a component in the positive j hat
direction.
And the magnitude of that component
is going to be this much, which is the adjacent side.
So it's going to be cosine of theta in the j hat direction.

We have now fully derived correspondences
between both the unit vectors, i hat j hat and r hat theta hat,
as well as the magnitude r and the relevant magnitudes
x and y for polar and Cartesian coordinate systems.
