
We're now going to talk about gravity
at the surface of the Earth.
Specifically, the gravitational acceleration
that a body on the surface is experiencing.
That is the reason why I'm not flying away right now,
because I'm standing here and my body
is experiencing this gravitational acceleration.
Let's look at that in more detail.
Let's say we have the Sun here, and it's
being orbited by the Earth.
And so the earth is experiencing a force,
F. Let's say this is object 1 and this is object 2, of 1,
2 towards the Sun.
It also means that we are describing
this with a unit vector r hat.
In polar coordinates that goes the opposite way.
And so you have this here.
And we can then write down our universal [INAUDIBLE] rotation.
And we're going to have minus, because this is pointing
in the opposite direction of the force here, Gm1m2 over r1 2
squared.
That here is a distance between the two objects
and, the direction is given here by the r hat,
together with the minus sign.
Now, we can consider a slightly different scenario now.
We have the Earth here, and we're
moving our other object, our second object, right here
on top of the surface of the Earth.
And we have already been using F equals mg
because that describes how objects
fall close to the surface of the Earth.
So if I let my pen drop here, then that's described by F
equals mg.
It's a very special kind of acceleration,
the gravitational acceleration, that is actually tied
to this kind of setup here.
So something that is at the surface
or near the surface of the Earth.
So I want to write a little Earth here
to make that very clear.
If I was on the moon, I had different dimensions,
the moon is a lot smaller than the Earth,
and so I would get a g moon, that
is actually quite a difference.
Only 16% of the Earth's gravitational acceleration.
What we're going to do now is we're
going to combine these two things because, really, it's
the same kind of scenario.
I move our second object right to the surface of my Earth.
Then I can use the same setup as what we have here.
And so we're going to equate it out,
and we're going to have mg Earth.
And that's equals-- we're going to take the magnitude
of this force here now.
So we have gm, and now we need to see.
So this little mass here has mass m.
And this is our Earth.
So we know that is an Earth radius
and it has an Earth mass.
So this is our test mass here, and now m Earth
is the second mass over the radius of the Earth squared.
And we'll see that m and m here cancel,
so the mass of the test object actually
is no longer important, and we get
to g Earth equals gm Earth over the Earth radius squared.
And you will see that, really, if we were sitting
on a different planet, we would have
a different gravitational acceleration because it
is tied to the mass of our planet and the Earth radius.
So in the following, let's put some numbers into this
to actually calculate the little g.
So we have g Earth, our gravitational acceleration.
And so we have capital G, that's the gravitational constant,
6.67 times 10 to the minus 11 newton per kilogram
squared meters square, and then times the Earth mass.
And that's about 6 times 10 to the 24 kilograms.
And we need to divide that by the Earth's radius.
And that's also about 6 times 10 to the 6 meters.
And that gets squared.
And so that comes out to about 9.81 meters per second squared.
And I'm pretty sure all you have seen this number here already.
So again, the point is that this pertains
to this particular setup.
Means that we are operating here on the surface of the Earth.
If I was going to go on a really tall mountain,
let's say the Mauna Kea mountain on the big island of Hawaii
at 10,000 feet, my little g would already
be a little bit different because I would be much further
away from the center of the Earth
than what the average Earth radius is.
So we have here used the gravitational constant plus
the Earth mass and the Earth radius to determine little g.
But one can actually also do it the opposite way.
Back in the day, capital G was not known.
And so you can do an experiment to determine little g
from some kind of set up in the lab,
and then actually determine your gravitational constant.
Maybe you're going to do that one day.