
Today we'll derive the velocity vectors
for the motion of a particle in circular motion,
and we'll do so in polar coordinate system.
In polar coordinate system, the position vector
is this vector r, defined from the origin
of your coordinate system to the position of the particle.
The unit vector would be these r hat vector,
which is radially outward, and is theta hat vector, which
is tangential and perpendicular to the r hat direction.
We'll assume here that the motion of the particle
is confined to this circle of radius r.

The implication being that then this position vector
would have a constant magnitude, which
is the radius of this circle.
And we'll call this r without the vector notation.

So in polar coordinate system, our position vector
can simply be written as this magnitude r in the r hat
direction.
To get the velocity, then, we take the time derivative
of this position vector.

The magnitude r being a constant with time
will come out of the derivative, but we
will take the time derivative then of this r hat vector.

In polar coordinate system, this time derivative of r hat
is not trivial because the direction of r hat changes
with time.
So at a later time, for instance,
when the particle is over here, the r hat direction
will be radially outward this way,
and the theta hat direction will be here.
So both r hat and theta hat will constantly change direction
as a function of time.
So to calculate an expression for this dr hat dt,
we had previously derived a relationship
between the r hat and theta hat unit vectors,
with i hat and j hat, our unit vectors
in Cartesian coordinates system, which do not change with time.
We've established that r hat is a rotation from the i hat
direction, meaning that this r hat
direction is a rotation of an angle theta from the x-axis.
So similarly, then, the theta hat direction,
which is perpendicular to the r hat direction,
will be a rotation of an angle theta with respect
to the j hat direction.
We then derive that r hat is going
to have a component of cosine theta in the i hat
direction, that's this component, plus sine
of theta in the j hat direction, which is this component.
And theta hat is going to have a component in the minus i hat
direction, which is in minus sine of theta,
plus a component in the j hat direction, which
is this adjacent, which is cosine theta in the j hat
direction.
So from this expression, we can take the time derivative,
dr hat dt, the derivative of cosine
giving us minus sine of theta, and because theta
can change as a function of time,
then we have to do a chain rule to get d theta dt,
that is, this, the derivative of this expression,
in the i hat direction.
And the derivative of sine theta is
going to be cosine of theta, and by the chain rule, d theta dt,
in the j hat direction.
So by taking the time derivative of this r hat vector, in fact,
we pick up a d theta dt, and the remaining expression,
minus sine of theta in the i hat direction, plus cosine
of theta in the j hat direction, is exactly what theta hat is.

This expression, in parentheses, is exactly what theta hat is.
So the time derivative of the r hat dt
gives us d theta dt in the theta hat direction.

Now that we've derived an expression for the time
derivative of dr hat dt, we are ready to continue
our derivation for the velocity.

Then the time derivative of the position vector,
which gives us the velocity, is r,
which is a constant, times the time derivative of r hat,
and the time derivative of r hat gives us a d theta
dt, in the theta hat direction.
